Trying a second time to see if the microphone will
work, pinning it on my tie, looking out the window
in the next room away from the machine, trying to
hope that it will work, wondering, wondering if it
will this time. End of test.
We're now on May the 7th, sitting in the front room
down on Lee Hollow in Bryan, chatting with Austin
Curley, who spells that A-U-S-T-O-N,
K-E-R-L-E-Y. Mr. Curley has been here a long time.
Austin, would you first, for someone who may not
know you, who might read this material or listen to
the tape, in the future, would you briefly
summarize your experience prior to the time you
came back to A&M to join the faculty and staff?
Where did you grow up and when did you get to A&M and
so forth? Well, I think that my mother and father
were, they were farmers in Collingwood County.
And things were difficult for them. I was number
four of the four children who survived the time of
life. As a matter of fact, I was a twin, and my twin
brother died the first day. And so it goes. At the
time I was born, our family had left the farm and
moved to Bonham, Texas. I guess in those days that
would have been moving to the big city.
We were in Bonham a few years where my father was
able to get a job with the Missouri, Kansas, and
Texas Railways. I guess that would be equivalent
to today's air or what have you. Well, we moved from
Bonham to Itasca.
He had a better job. And we lived there for about two
years. And then he moved up the road, so to speak, to
Hillsborough. And there, we were there three or
four years. This painting up here over the clock is
the Hillsboro-Cady
Railroad Station. Now, that was where my father
worked. It was a few years later that we're talking
about. There was a platform out at the back where
that white horse is. And so my father bought me a
little metal, all metal tricycle and would let me
play with it on the platform. Well, the platform
was built to standard height for wagons. And I was
scared to get within 10 feet of the edge, so he had no
problems there. And that was the way he kept me. And
that was so my mother could pick cotton. And well,
we moved to Hillsboro. And from there, my father,
you see the union, you bid on the job. So he bid on the
job at Sherman And we moved to Sherman in 1921. It
was a fortunate thing for us. It was a city with
excellent schools, three or four colleges, and a
very promising community. We had a library,
Carnegie Library.
even at the age of, I was in first grade. We lived two
blocks from the library. So we made many trips to
the library, my sisters and myself and my older
brother. I became an avid reader and I read They'd
have to run me out of the adult section
occasionally because they realized I was not
ready to read, not so much whether it was, as they
say, dirty or not, but it would just be something I
wouldn't understand. So, back to the kids section
I would go. But I became a great supporter of
libraries. I'm that way today. For several years,
I would shelve books at the Bryan Public Library.
Got a big kick out of it, Bill Barzak and I. Well, I
entered the public schools, George Washington
Elementary School in Sherman, first grade. And
schooling was relatively easy for me. I enjoyed
it.
I think that as I look back on it, it was fortunate
because we had a good quality of teachers.
Teachers were highly regarded, and from good
colleges, and the community supported good
schools. Well, I went through elementary, junior
high school, as they called it, and then high
school. It was 11 grades then. And I got off a year
early there. But I graduated with a reasonably
good grade. I worked in the afternoons and on
Saturday as a stock boy in the 5 and 10 cent store.
And that was good because I was getting up of an age
that I think my parents felt I needed to work. Work
was important. And I stayed out of college a year to
work and save what I could.
I think that helped me also to kind of get my sights
settled better. So my brother in the meantime had
entered Texas A&M in architecture. But he had a man
in Sherman who was backing him, they used to say, to
see that he had the money to go. Well, the sophomore
year at A&M for him was a very disastrous thing
because in October the bottom fell out of
everything. And about two months later, he came to
my brother and told him, he said, I deeply regret
this. But he said, I'm going to be lucky to keep this
business. And all our own family will have to work.
Well, my brother went two years, worked a year, and
then two years. I did the same thing. I worked. two
years and stayed out and then worked two years.
Now, the library helped me out though because
during that year I worked, I figured that if I got a
job at Texas A&M, I'd have to have something that
would give me an inside approach.
So I decided I would try to work in the library. So I
went down to the librarian at the library and told
her what my predicament was. And she said, yes, she
said, I would be willing to work with you. And if you
would, this will take now about three months every
night to do what I want you to do. So we started out.
So I would work all day as a stock boy. go buy the
dairy, which was right behind me. Now, that is the
sale. And I would buy a quart of milk. And I would
drink a quart of milk, and then I would head out for
the library. Well, in about three months, why, she
finally said, I think you're ready to work in the
library. And they carried me through all the
departments. So I wrote Dr. Mayo, Thomas F. Mayo, a
great man, in my opinion. And I told him, I've done
all this work. I sent my only copy that I had of
anything in writing because there was no way in
those days to make a copy. I don't know what ever
happened to it, but they did write back and say I
could expect to be used in the library. So I started
next to him in the fall of 34, and I majored in
economics. To tell you the truth, I didn't want
else to major.
In 1934, liberal arts students had a little, quite
a bit of hazing. What do you think you're going to do
with that when you get through? Well, it was all
right. It was in good spirits, and you learned by
listening. There are ways of coming back with
that, but you have to listen to people that know
what to say. Well, I... I did well in my grades,
but I learned a lot the hard way. In the first
semester that I was in school, I had better than a B.
I thought, you know, I'm going to get all this. I
can't. So I was eligible, so I took 21 hours. The
second semester, well, I was working 20 hours.
Well, I thought I was going to die, but I was too
stubborn to back out. So I made the semester all
right, but I learned a lesson. I learned a lesson to
be able to. I never will forget, I walked into that
college. It was in psychology. And I was the only
freshman in the class. And that, in 1934, a
freshman in a class of juniors and seniors was not
particularly welcomed. And there was a senior in
the class, though. And he said, fisherman, what
are you doing taking that course? And I told him. He
said, well, what do you think? I said, I think I made
a mistake. He said, well, come around, I'll help
you. So I learned one of many, many lessons. Well,
the
life in the Corps was very variable to me because I
had a life that was expectancy was clear and
concise. and you had confidence that it would
happen, and you could depend on it. My roommate was
a Mexican-American boy from San Antonio, Rudolfo
San Miguel. Now, how did you two get linked up as
roommates? Do you know? I don't know, but I have a
hunch. The company commander Mr. Allen had been a
freshman under my brother see I didn't have any
better sense but go get in the same company my
brother had been in I didn't have much sense on some
of those things well Mr. Allen Mr. Allen put us
together and I I loved that man like a brother How
were Hispanics treated in the student body then?
They were treated cordially.
Now, when it came to social events, neither one
particularly wanted to do what the other wanted to
do. But in the company itself, well, now, Rudolfo
had a brother, Arturo San Miguel, who was a
sophomore. He started here early. These two men
both were distinguished students every semester
they went. Arturo was a mechanical engineering
graduate, and Rudolfo was an architect. I was very
fortunate. These two young men were true
gentlemen. Courteous, funny, fun-loving, but
respected your privacy. Yes, they were great.
During the years, I visited his family in San
Antonio. He came up to Sherman and visited my
family. And we... we, we had great regard for each
other. I, later, there, there, we, the junior
year, we had, we had another Mexican-American,
that, two of them and myself. He had, he had been a
worker in the dining hall, and then there were
barracks back of Sebesta where single men could
live, and he lived in there. Well, he would, he
fought his way through, he finally graduated.
Well, the,
now, Rudolfo had a five-year program So the year I
stayed out, evened us up, and it was a good
arrangement. Well, I got my degree, and I had
worked in the summers for the AAA, the Cotton
Program. And
I was offered a job, two or three jobs, in Dallas.
But I didn't want to go to Dallas. Well, I think I
simply had not found what I really wanted to do. And
maybe that was the excuse. But I worked for the AAA
from June until about April.
was offered a job with the Farm Credit
Administration out of Dallas as a field
supervisor on emergency crop lawns, drought and
things like that. Well, it was a good job, and in the
meantime, Melba and I were married in the fall of
39. And she had been an art major at
Texas State College for Women. TSCW then. Yeah, it
was, well, her first year was CIA. CIA. Well, we
were detailed to, or sent to Crockett, And I had
five counties. Crawford was the most eastern
point, and Hearn was the other end of it. And this
was a very pleasant two years before World War II
broke out. World War II broke out, and I was sent my
greetings, of course, pretty quick. and I was on
the cadre of the 90th Infantry Division and I
enjoyed my duty as a platoon leader. I stayed with
that cadre through the battalion maneuvers and
then I was ordered that what's called the detached
officer list, I think, where you are pulled out and
I was assigned ROTCU
and sent to New Mexico A&M at Las Cruces. Well I had a
very, we moved out there, had a very interesting
time and I found a great deal of interest and
satisfaction in working with these young men and
it was just kind of like finding a home. Well, I
stayed there a year and we also were operating the
Army Specialized Training Program.
This wrote a book about it someone did scholars and
foxholes well those young scholars in the
february of 44 found themselves down for dealing
with truth and i i i really feel that was a bad faith
on the part of federal government because i had men
in my company that had were tech sergeants And
they lost it all. Instead of getting their rank
back, they were sent and replaced. Well, I was sent
from Las Cruces to Arlington, and I stayed there a
year. uh while i was at arlington i was detailed to
the command general staff college as a student
with the zone of interior course and rated a
superior i i like the military but i like teaching
better i could have it both Well, I think that that
was a significant point in my life, that I almost
had my future structured
as I went through this. Well, when the war was over,
and I was sent back to making cattle feed loans, I
knew I had to get back. So we came back to Sherman.
And we made it through a difficult three or four
months. And then I was offered a position with the
Sherman Public Schools to organize the first
distributive education program in the school.
And
that fitted my structure because these young
people were in school, and then would work in the
afternoon training stations. And I deeply
enjoyed this. I did this two years, and then I
realized I should be getting on with graduate
school. So we talked about it. In the meantime, at
that point, we had four children. And Melvin said,
well, if we're going to have this family and we've
got them, we're not going to make it on just you
teaching. So she said, we'll go over to Denton and
you do your graduate work, and I'll see what I can do
about completing my undergraduate. So we did
this. And we were there in Denton for two years. And
I finished a master's and got accepted in their
doctoral program, the first one. I was in the first
one. And you see, I could leave my work at Foreign
Astronomy, for example, and take a course. And it
was very meaningful.
about that time the public schools in Sherman
asked me to please come back and they wanted me to be
vice principal of the hospital and director of
guidance. I had a principal who was very
progressive and and I was ready. I had gotten
proper training. I started my degree in business
administration, but I changed over to guidance.
Well, I went over to Sherman, Melba State at Denton
with the children, and my wife's brother came over
from Sherman to enter graduate school. He was a
naval veteran. So he would stay at our house. And
then on Friday he would come home and I would come
home. Well, we worked this out. And then in March of
that year, I had a telephone call from Dr. Bertram
at the basic division down here. And he said, I want
to talk to you about coming to Texas A&M. And so
Alvin and I went down on Friday, and we were still
having classes on Saturdays. Dean Bertrand told
me about the Basic Division. And really,
Haskell's Basic Division was nothing in the world
but a strong guidance-centered structure, but
with academic
emphasis. And that fitted my background very
well. And I felt very comfortable about being able
to handle relationships with the Corps. Now, this
was what year? 1952. 52. March of 52. All right. And
then when does he offer you? He offered me a job
about the next week. What was the beginning pay?
$4,000, I believe. For 12 months. Well, he said, we
will try for 12 months. See, we also, that, you
know, I came down here with great enthusiasm and
support of this program. Because, and the
remarkable thing was that the major person in it
was an engineer, Mr. Gilchrist. And he foresaw the
difficulty that the freshman students were
having in the freshman year. So he put the first
year students all out at the air base. Now was that
still, when you came that fall of 52, were they
freshmen still out? No, because in 51, You see, the
war broke out with Korea. Oh, and that took place.
And so they said we got to have this facility back.
So you began September? No, I began July the 1st,
1952. At that point, describe the campus
physically. What buildings, what were the
primary buildings where? Oh, there's little or no
difference except the Memorial Student Center.
No difference from? 1939. Okay, but make believe
that I had never seen the campus. Well, now the YMCA
was still... a very important cog in the life,
off-campus life.
It was still functioning. But the Memorial
Student Center was sort of the exciting point on
the campus, because here was a place that parents
could come and find restrooms. Now, I presume that
for you people of your experience, the MSC was
almost luxurious. Oh, yes. Yes, I was sort of awed,
actually. It was so far beyond. Now, I don't mean to
be critical here because when I was a student, like
all the other fellows will tell you, If we had a
dance on a weekend in the spring, one of the poor
dorms, and of course they were all poor except the
international, they'd choose one, Hart Hall. I
was in Hart Hall two years, and we always got
caught. But we would take out. We would get our gear
together and leave the dormitory and And don't
think it wasn't clean when we left. And the young
ladies would use that? Yes. This MSC, you and I both
knew Wayne Stark well. Describe young Wayne Stark
when you first came back. Well, Wayne was an
excellent...